Assignment 1
COS721
2026
Weight: 30% of your semester mark.
Due: Monday, 14 September 2026.
Upload to ClickUP.
Note that this is an individual assignment; you are only allowed to submit work
that you have done on your own.
1 Introduction
For this assignment you are expected to propose and evaluate toolmarks to help classify
PDF documents, with toolmarks understood as used in my paper on the topic [1]. In this
assignment we will refer to this paper as the underlying paper or, where the context is
clear, simply as the paper.

This introduction describes the context and concepts. While they should have a signifi-
cant impact on the report you submit, it is possible that your report will not mention some
of these issues at all. The expectations about the content of your assignment are provided
in section 3 below. Also note that some technical expectations (such as maximum length
and the font size to use are specified towards the end of this document).

Let us refer to the prefixes used in the paper as loci. Hence stream-* is a locus, as is
length-*. ‘The toolmarks you propose for this assignment should centre around two loci
not explored in the paper — neither literally, nor in spirit. The first prohibition means
that if you want to use the pagetype-* locus discussed in an announcement, you cannot
call it the page-* locus, because the page-* locus is already used in the paper. ‘The second
prohibition means that you cannot propose, say, a streamterm-* locus that reflects how
the stream keyword is terminated, because that is exactly what the stream-* locus is used
for.

Some obvious strategies to find new loci would be to consider (a) line terminations (or,
in general, what follows some keyword); (b) the sequence in which tokens appear (such as
seq-* and pagetype-* from the announcement); (c) checks whether a token is present or
absent (such as xref-* and objstm-*; and (d) usage conventions (such as length-*). You
are encouraged to think beyond these four strategies. Some of these strategies also come
with caveats: We noted that line terminations quickly become boring; while they are not

banned, your mark for a line-termination locus is likely to be significantly lower than a
locus that just mirrors some existing locus. However, it may be a good idea to start with
such a simple locus, incorporate it into the ‘system’, and confirm that it does not really
contribute. This will confirm that you understand the operation of the ‘system’. Note
that such a confirmation will not directly contribute to your marks for the assignment; the
confirmation is intended as a self-check to confirm to you that you do understand the way
the ‘system’ works.

Note that it is expected that you will explore some locus and initially find it interesting,
but later determine that it is not a good choice. It seems like a good idea to prepare a
list of potential loci so that picking another one is simple if a chosen one does not meet
your expectations. In fact, trying a few and then writing up your best two loci seems
worthwhile.

2 Initial suitability checks

Consider the length-* locus. It consists of length-absent, length-direct and length-indirect
marks, as well as the complements of the latter two. Suppose it rather only consisted of
length-absent and length-present. Then one document would have been associated
with the former mark, while 999 would have been associated with the latter mark. In this
form it clearly would not have had discriminatory power. Any mark that is too preva-
lent does not shed much insight. A mark with low prevalence may, however, identify some
unique aspect of a scarce tool that behaves in some unusual manner. In this particular case
the document without a /Length is 6HTC5, which clearly is not an ‘unusual’ PDF, but not
a PDF document at all. Another way to think about the length-* locus is that documents
with /Length tokens will manifest as length-direct and/or length-indirect. Would
flagging them as length-present not be redundant?

A second common sense check is the nature of the locus you are considering. You
may, for example, see /DCTDecode in a number of documents — almost 200, if my quick
check is correct. However, when you look at the PDF reference manuals, you will find that
/DCTDecode is closely linked to JPEG compression. Hence, such a mark may differentiate
between documents that embed JPEG images, and those that do not. We are interested
is marks left by the creation tool, rather than marks that depend on the content of the
document.

A third check was discussed in the announcement. Ideally marks at a locus should be
consistent for a given tool, unless it adds discriminatory power.

Most of the preceding remarks deal with making appropriate choices about the two loci
you will propose. In many cases, these issues will not feature in your report at all.

2

3 Your assignment

As noted, your assignment deals with proposing and assessing two loci and their associated
marks. This section splits the task into various subtasks. Marks will be awarded for the
subtasks; hence it is suggested that you use this section as a template for your submission.
3.1 The loci and toolmarks

Briefly name and describe the loci you selected, as well as their associated marks. A table
listing the prevalence of the various marks will be useful. Ideally the table will suggest that
some variety is present. Consider table 3 in the underlying paper. The observation that
stream-cr-lf and stream-1f, respectively, represent about 66% and 33% of the dataset
may be reason for optimism. At this stage stream-cr-other and stream-absent seem
less useful, but are necessary to cover the entire dataset. Consider table 10. Even the
(almost) 80/20 split turned out to be useful. Note that this check is just a rule-of-thumb
check: some variety is necessary but not sufficient to ensure utility.

3.2 Consistency of marks within tools

As explained in an announcement, this task essentially requires you to perform

minus class mark | we -l

where class is iterated over the ten or so different classes in the paper, and mark is
iterated over the marks associated with your proposed loci. If matters work perfectly, all
marks associated with a locus will lead to an empty set, except for one mark that will
yield all the documents in the class used in the calculation. Suppose your locus is called
1-* with associated marks 1-a, 1-b and 1-c. Then you may find that class 1 in the paper
is consistently associated with, say, 1-b. ‘Then it would be simple to report that 1-b is
characteristic of class 1 (and, hence, also classes 2 and 3). In fact, a simple table with rows
labelled 1-a, 1-b and 1-c may be a good starting point. The classes associated with each
of these marks may then be provided in the second column, next to the appropriate row
label.

If the marks are inconsistent across multiple classes, it is reason for concern. One option
is to explain these inconsistencies. Another option is to pick another locus, which may lead
to simpler outcomes.

Suppose the marks are mostly consistent. Is it possible to explain the inconsistencies?
This may be a great opportunity to demonstrate insight; demonstrations of insight tend
to lead to higher marks.

Suppose you find inconsistencies for, say, class 1. Recall that classes 1, 2 and 3 started
from different tools. If your marks differentiate between tools 1, 2 and 3 (or between two of
them), it may also be very useful because the discriminatory power of the ‘system’ will be
increased. In fact, it is quite easy to differentiate between some of the ‘compound’ classes

3

to better identify the (different) tools that were ‘merged’ into one bigger ‘compound’ class.
It may be worth considering this when you start looking for loci.

Ultimately, this part of your assignment may report the classes for which your toolmarks
are consistent. It may additionally reflect on the reasons why inconsistencies are present.
Hopefully any inconsistencies will not diminish discriminatory power. This part may be a
good place for you to demonstrate insight.

3.3 Integration with other toolmarks

Use the environment provided for the underlying paper. Add your toolmarks to the marks
directory. Regenerate the mark vectors associated with each of the 1000 documents. Re-
generate the feature vectors and induced classes. Very little (if any) of this needs to be
discussed in your report (unless something worth discussing emerges, which seems unlikely).

Now compare the (new) induced classes with the versions that existed before you added
your toolmarks to the environment. Discuss any differences. (As described, the process
may guide you to a situation where the new induced classes are identical to the old ones;
such an observation would be fine.)

Next, compare the new feature vectors to the versions that existed initially. If your
toolmarks do not appear in (at least, some of) the new vectors, something is wrong, and
you will have to return to earlier stages of the process — perhaps even to the beginning.

In which feature vectors do your toolmarks appear? If only in some of them, is it worth
discussing? In general, these comments would probably be brief.

Compare your loci with other loci in the feature vectors? Can you find any loci that
correlate exactly with your loci? As an example, suppose every time your 1-a appears
in a feature vector, stream-lf is also present (and vice versa). Also, whenever your 1-b
appears, stream-cr-lf is present (and vice versa). In addition, every time your 1-c is
present, stream-cr-other is also present (and vice versa). Then there is some specific
correlation between 1-* and stream-*. Is this correlation explicable, or is it spurious?

A looser correlation may exist where, say |-b always coincides with stream-cr-1f, but
other marks associated with 1-* and stream-* do not match. If you do not observe the
strict correlation from the previous paragraph, discuss your observations about any less
strict correlation.

If you cannot find any correlations between your loci and others, discuss any correlations
that exist within the provided toolmarks. Reflect on your observations. Also attempt to
explain why such correlations exist, but you were unable to find any that involve your loci.
(If you only find ‘boring’ partial correlations for your loci, you are free to mention them
and then rather discuss more interesting correlations in the provided toolmarks.)

Note that various (abstract) approaches exist for finding the correlations discussed here.
One approach would be to construct new sets, with each set named after a toolmark. As
elements, each new set contains the classes in which the toolmark appears in the feature
vector. One of the scripts provided with the paper performs exactly such ‘flipping’. Then
calculate the MD5 hashes of all these sets and sort according to the digests. It will be
simple to see which toolmarks appear in the same feature vectors. As a special case, note

4

that some toolmarks do not appear in any feature vectors and their sets will be empty
here. Do not infer too much from these empty sets that all map to the same digest.

For the sake of illustration, I did exactly what I described in the previous para-
graph and created the sets in a directory called seenin. hen I executed the command
md5sum seenin/endstream-* seenin/endobj-* | sort. ‘This produced the following
output (to which I added some blank lines for the sake of readability):
07c1b603cdf3b3272f951c5f8741495a seenin/endobj-lf
07c1b603cdf3b3272f951c5f8741495a seenin/endstream-lf
16a4d988526 1b3b4a346c8a88890a675 seenin/endobj-NO-cr-1f
16a4d9885261b3b4a346c8a88890a675 seenin/endstream-NO-cr-lf
Ab216bbe4bf 1d8dc1148b96c8ef1752a seenin/endobj-NO-1f
4b216bbe4bf 1d8dc1148b96c8ef1752a seenin/endstream-NO-1f
93b3dd5648c9deccf5aed6980c0eedO9 seenin/endobj-cr-1lf
93b3dd5648c9deccfb5aed6980c0eedO9 seenin/endstream-cr-1lf
acfe70e01a87ff686d6f6a7593d45dce seenin/endobj-cr-other
acfe70e01a87ff686d6f6a7593d45dce seenin/endstream-cr-other
aecle69b314ala5d0bd685446f9cfb25 seenin/endobj-NO-cr-other
aecie69b314ala5d0bd685446f9cfb25 seenin/endstream-NO-cr-other
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endobj-absent
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endobj-other
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endobj-space-cr
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endobj-space-lf
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endobj-space-other
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endstream-space-cr
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endstream-space-cr-lf
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endstream-space-lf
d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e seenin/endstream-space-other
The block at the bottom (d41...27e) are all empty. Note the perfect correlation between
how endstream and endobj are terminated with a CR, LF or CR/LF (as well as not
terminated by these characters). Hence, strict correlation exists in the provided data.
However, this was expected for these toolmarks and discussing this would not provide
much new insight.

5

3.4 Reflection

In the conclusion to your submission give a step back and reflect on your observations
made while working on your assignment. You may have seen many opportunities that
could have been selected as loci, or you may have struggled to even have found the two
discussed in your report. ‘The first loci you picked, may have withstood the challenges
posed by the assignment, or you may have determined that they were poor choices and
had to select new ones. At this stage you should have some insight into the ease with
which new loci (and associated toolmarks) may be selected, and may have developed some
insights into pitfalls that have to be avoided. You may be impressed by the manner in
which classification works and/or you may have developed some significant concerns. (If
your first picks just worked, it may be appropriate to consider two additional loci, just to
confirm that selection is as simple as you probably deem it.)

Use this final section of your report to reflect on the usability of toolmarks (as en-
countered in this assignment) to classify PDF documents. Illustrate points you make with
specific examples as far as possible.

4 Assessment

You already know that your submission will be awarded a mark out of 30. ‘The four sections
of your assignment will, respectively, be marked out of 5, 5, 10 and 10 marks. (In some
cases the rubric may be adjusted; if your second section is, for example, weighted heavier
than your final section, the second section may be marked out of 10, and the final one
out of 5.) For each of the four parts of your answer, an impression mark will be assigned.
This impression mark will be based on two factors: How hard or simple to execute was
the task you set for yourself to execute, and how well did you execute it? Sometimes less
is more: You may have to discard some really impressive goals that are too hard to report
on: If your task is (almost) impossible and you fail to deliver, you will not do well. On the
other hand, it is possible to select an extremely simple approach where the simplicity (and
naivety) of the approach does not warrant a high mark. To get the best possible mark,
plan to finish your assignment ahead of schedule and carefully reread it before submission.
That will enable you to better judge whether the (reasonable) task that you have chosen,
has been executed as well as possible.

5 Submission

1. Submit your final answer to the upload slot on clickUP. (You are allowed to submit

as many reports and as often as you want; your final submission will be assessed.)

2. Your report is limited to four (4) pages; only the first four pages of your submission

will be marked.

3. Submit your answer as an A4 PDF document.

6

4. Use a 12pt font as the primary font in your submission.

5. Often students feel that they simply must clarify some aspect in a way that cannot
be done within four pages. If you must, you may include up to two pages of addenda
beyond the initial four pages. ‘They will not be marked. However, the lecturer has
in some cases in the past briefly looked at addenda if some issue seemed particularly
intriguing.

6. It is not foreseen that references will contribute to this assignment; if you wish to
include references, they may spill over beyond page 4 to pages that form part of the
addenda.

7. Double check that your name appears on your submission: The submissions will be
printed to be marked and any identifying information in, for example, the file name,
will be lost.

8. The assignments will be printed in monochrome to be marked — do not rely on
colour.

Have fun!

References
[1] M.S. Olivier. On the classification of questioned PDF documents — attributing PDF
documents to the tools that created them. Forensic Science International: Digital
Investigation, 56:302104, June 2026.
7
